docs: tutorial for Request Reply using WebSockets with AsyncAPI (#2353)
asyncapi/website: pages/docs/tutorials/websocket/websocket-request-reply.md

---

> title: Implement Request Reply in an AsyncAPI Document for a Slack App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Implement Request/Reply in an AsyncAPI document for a Slack app
```

> description: In this tutorial, you'll learn to write an AsyncAPI document that implements the request reply feature for a Slack application using the WebSocket Protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: In this tutorial, you'll learn how to write an AsyncAPI document that implements the request/reply feature in a Slack application using the WebSocket protocol.
```

weight: 220
---

## Introduction

> In the [Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets]() tutorial, you learnt how to write an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot `Heart-Counter`  that actively monitored reactions associated with a message. In this lesson, let's go a step further. After receiving a reaction, `Heart-Counter` responds by sending a message back to the Slack server through WebSocket to confirm the event reception. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/websocket) tutorial, you learned how to write an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot `Heart-Counter`  that actively monitored reactions associated with a message. In this lesson, let's go a step further. After receiving a reaction, `Heart-Counter` responds via a message back to the Slack server through WebSocket to confirm the event reception. 
```

> The interaction where the Slackbot acknowledges the event and replies with a specific response sets the stage for the Request-Reply messaging pattern discussed in this context. You can refer the [Request/reply pattern](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/getting-started/request-reply) tutorial for an introduction to the Request Reply pattern implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interaction where the Slackbot acknowledges the event and replies with a specific response sets the stage for the Request/Reply messaging pattern discussed in this context. 

> Refer to the [Request/Reply pattern tutorial](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/getting-started/request-reply) for an introduction to its implementation. 
```

> The aim of this tutorial is to provide a clear understanding of the Request-Reply Messaging pattern and showcase how AsyncAPI effectively describes it using a practical use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant Heart-Counter
participant Slack Server (Socket Mode)
participant User

User-->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Adds emoji to a message.

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->>Heart-Counter: Sending "reaction_added" payload
Note left of Heart-Counter: Event received
Heart-Counter->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Sending acknowledgement
``` 

## Background context

> The [Request-Reply Messaging Pattern](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/concepts/asyncapi-document/reply-info) in AsyncAPI is an exciting and a highly anticipated feature.  The messaging pattern mirrors a traditional conversation, where one "requester" entity initiates a query or request, and the "responder" entity provides a specific and expected response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Request-Reply Messaging Pattern](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/concepts/asyncapi-document/reply-info) in AsyncAPI is an exciting and highly anticipated feature.  The messaging pattern mirrors a traditional conversation, where one "requester" entity initiates a query or request, and the "responder" entity provides a specific and expected response.
```

The messaging pattern can work in both synchronous and asynchronous environments and is very beneficial to decouple components by allowing them to operate independently in a distributed system. 

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  participant Client
  participant Server

  Client->>Server: Request
  note right of Client: Continue with other tasks

  Server-->>Client: Acknowledgment
  Server->>Server: Process Request
  Server-->>Client: Reply
```

## Define messages

> In the `Heart-Counter` tutorial, you dealt with the `hello` event that was triggered when the WebSocket connection was established and the `reaction` event that was expected when a new reaction-added event was triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `Heart-Counter` tutorial, you dealt with the `hello` event triggered when the WebSocket connection was established and the `reaction` event expected when a new reaction-added event was triggered.
```

> In this tutorial, you'll be adding the `acknowledge` message to your AsyncAPI document to represent the acknowledgement sent by the Slack application back to the server to indicate that it has successfully received the message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll add the `acknowledge` message to your AsyncAPI document to represent the acknowledgment sent by the Slack application back to the server to indicate that it has successfully received the message.
```

> <CodeBlock language="yaml">

Reviewer 2: regarding CodeBlock and highlighting concept, you can highlight part related to `acknowledge` message to drag reader attention to the most important part of the snippet. I hope you know what I mean

{`components:
  messages:
    reaction:
      summary: Action triggered when the channel receives a new reaction-added event
      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/reaction'
    hello:
      summary: Action triggered when a successful WebSocket connection is established
      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/hello'
    acknowledge:
      summary: Acknowledgement response sent to Server
      payload:
        $ref: '#/components/schemas/acknowledge' `}
</CodeBlock>

## Define schemas

> Previously, the `reaction` schema was simplified to just include the `event` payload. However, in this instance, you will be elaborating on the schema for the complete request it is anticipated to receive.

Reviewer 2: is it necessary in this request/reply related tutorial?

Reviewer 2: if not, remove and just focus on schema for acknowledgement message

Author: This tutorial is set up as a continuation of the prev one but there's a big difference in schemas being used. Feels like i have to clarify this when someone reads this for the first time.

Reviewer: I find myself in agreement with Vaishnavi's approach. Because the schema changes, I prefer we give more context to the reader.

Let's leave it as she wrote it 😸

> Previously, the `reaction` schema was simplified to just include the `event` payload. However, in this instance, you will be elaborating on the schema for the complete request it is anticipated to receive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, the `reaction` schema was simplified to include the `event` payload. However, in this instance, you will be able to elaborate on the schema for the complete request it is expected to receive.
```

                  description: |
                    User ID that created the original item that has been reacted
                    to
                item:
                  type: object
                  properties:
                    channel:
                      type: string
                      description: Channel information of original message
                    ts:
                      type: string
                      description: Timestamp information of original message
                event_ts:
                  type: string
                  description: Reaction timestamp
        type:
          type: string
        accepts_response_payload:
          type: boolean `}
</CodeBlock>

Additionally, you will also be adding the `acknowledge` schema that makes use of the `envelope_id` attribute to send a reply back to Slack acknowledging that event has been received.

<CodeBlock language="yaml">
{`    acknowledge:
      type: object
      properties:
        envelope_id:
          type: string
          description: 'Unique ID of acknowledged payload'
        payload:
          type: object
          description: 'Optional payload of event' `}
</CodeBlock>

> ## Define channels 

Reviewer 2: this is a continuation right? so I guess instead of define channels it should say - add message to channel? or something similar

> You can extend the channel used by  `Heart-Counter` to now include the `acknowledge` message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extend the channel the `Heart-Counter` used to include the `acknowledge` message.
```

<CodeBlock language="yaml" highlightedLines={[9,10]}>
{`channels:
  root:
    address: /
    messages:
      hello:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/hello'
      reaction:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/reaction'
      acknowledge:
        $ref: '#/components/messages/acknowledge' `}
</CodeBlock>

## Define operations

> That brings to the important part of the tutorial where you get to finally represent the request reply pattern. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you've reached the most important part of the tutorial; it's time to represent the Request/Reply pattern. 
```

> Both `helloListener` and `reactionListener` operations are set to `receive` events. However, in the case of `reactionListener` you also want to represent the message that is sent back to the server. This is where the `reply` attribute comes into play. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both `helloListener` and `reactionListener` operations are set to `receive` events. However, in the case of `reactionListener`, you also want to represent the message sent back to the server. This is where the `reply` attribute comes into play. 
```

> Since both the request and reply function happens over the same WebSocket URL, both the `channel` values stay the same. However, you can differentiate the message each operation conveys by specifying the message it will send or receive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since both the request and reply function happens over the same WebSocket URL, both `channel` values stay the same. However, you can differentiate each operation's message by specifying the messages sent or received. 
```

Thus, you can say that for a `reaction` message received over the `root` channel, the `reactionListener` operation will reply with the `acknowledge` message over the same channel.

<CodeBlock language="yaml" highlightedLines={[14,15,16,17,18]}>
{`operations:
  helloListener:
    action: receive
    channel:
      $ref: '#/channels/root'
    messages:
      - $ref: '#/channels/root/messages/hello'
  reactionListener:
    action: receive
    channel: 
      $ref: '#/channels/root'
    messages:
      - $ref: '#/channels/root/messages/reaction'
    reply:
      messages:
        - $ref: '#/channels/root/messages/acknowledge'      
      channel: 
        $ref: '#/channels/root' `}
</CodeBlock>

Putting all this together, you have your AsyncAPI document ready to go!
<CodeBlock language="yaml">
{`asyncapi: 3.0.0
info:

>   title: Implement Request Reply in an AsyncAPI Document for a Slack App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title: Implement Request/Reply in an AsyncAPI document for a Slack app
```

                reaction:
                  type: string
                  description: The only reaction that you need is a heart emoji
                item_user:
                  type: string
                  description: |
                    User ID that created the original item that has been reacted
                    to
                item:
                  type: object
                  properties:
                    channel:
                      type: string
                      description: Channel information of original message
                    ts:
                      type: string
                      description: Timestamp information of original message
                event_ts:
                  type: string
                  description: Reaction timestamp
        type:
          type: string
        accepts_response_payload:
          type: boolean
    acknowledge:
      type: object
      properties:
        envelope_id:
          type: string
          description: 'Unique ID of acknowledged payload'
        payload:
          type: object
          description: 'Optional payload of event' `}
</CodeBlock>

## Summary

> Great job getting to the end! In this tutorial you learnt how to create an AsyncAPI document for a use case that implemented the Request Reply messaging pattern. Now you can try exploring this pattern with sub patterns to see how it works with different use cases in real life. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great job getting to the end! In this tutorial, you learned how to create an AsyncAPI document for a use case that implemented the Request-Reply messaging pattern. Now, you can explore this pattern with sub-patterns to see how it works with real-life use cases. 
```

---
title: Implement Request Reply in an AsyncAPI Document for a Slack App
description: In this tutorial, you'll learn to write an AsyncAPI document that implements the request reply feature for a Slack application using the WebSocket Protocol.
weight: 220
---

## Introduction
In the [Create an AsyncAPI Document for a Slackbot with WebSockets]() tutorial, you learnt how to write an AsyncAPI document for a Slackbot `Heart-Counter`  that actively monitored reactions associated with a message. In this lesson, let's go a step further. After receiving a reaction, `Heart-Counter` responds by sending a message back to the Slack server through WebSocket to confirm the event reception. 

> The interaction where the Slackbot acknowledges the event and replies with a specific response sets the stage for the Request-Reply messaging pattern discussed in this context. The aim of this tutorial is to provide a clear understanding of the Request-Reply Messaging pattern and showcase how AsyncAPI v3 effectively describes it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The interaction where the Slackbot acknowledges the event and replies with a specific response sets the stage for the Request-Reply messaging pattern discussed in this context. The aim of this tutorial is to provide a clear understanding of the Request-Reply Messaging pattern and showcase how AsyncAPI effectively describes it.
```

no need to mention v3 as asyncapi.com is for v3 only anyway

Reviewer 2: you can remove this references in other parts of the document as well

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant Heart-Counter
participant Slack Server (Socket Mode)
participant User

User-->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Adds emoji to a message.

Slack Server (Socket Mode)->>Heart-Counter: Sending "reaction_added" payload
Note left of Heart-Counter: Event received
Heart-Counter->>Slack Server (Socket Mode): Sending acknowledgement
``` 

## Background context

The Request-Reply Messaging Pattern in AsyncAPI v3 is an exciting and a highly anticipated feature.  The messaging pattern mirrors a traditional conversation, where one "requester" entity initiates a query or request, and the "responder" entity provides a specific and expected response.
The messaging pattern can work in both synchronous and asynchronous environments and is very beneficial to decouple components by allowing them to operate independently in a distributed system.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  participant Client
  participant Server

  Client->>Server: Request
  note right of Client: Continue with other tasks

  Server-->>Client: Acknowledgment
  Server->>Server: Process Request
  Server-->>Client: Reply
```

> ## Define AsyncAPI version, API information, and server

Reviewer 2: since your tutorial is a continuation of the other one, you do not have to repeat all the stuff you already have there in the other tutorial

better introduce full example that people get from previous tutorial, and later show specific parts that will require adjustment:
- so additional message added to channel
- schema for it
- and then reply in a reaction operation
